Skeleton post for stats comm call (#154)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2021-03-09-commcall-stats/index.md

title: rOpenSci Statistical Software Testing and Peer Review - Community Call Summary
author:
  - Noam Ross
  - Mark Padgham
  - Anna Krystalli
  - Alex Hayes
  - John Sakaluk
  - Steffi LaZerte
date: 2021-03-09
tags:
  - Software Peer Review
  - packages
  - community
  - statistics
  - community-call
description: "Summary of the Community Call on Statistical Software Testing and Peer Review"
twitterImg: blog/2021/03/09/commcall-stats/speakers_twitter.png
twitterAlt: "Headshots of the five speakers"
tweet: "Statistical Software Testing and Peer Review Community Call Summary by @noamross, @bikesrdata, @annakrystalli, @JohnSakaluk, @alexpghayes, & @steffilazerte!"
output: 
  html_document:
    keep_md: true
---

A week ago we held a [Community Call](/commcalls/feb2021-statsreview/) discussing rOpenSci Statistical Software Testing and Peer Review. 
This call included speakers [Noam Ross](/author/noam-ross/), [Mark Padgham](/author/mark-padgham), [Anna Krystalli](/author/anna-krystalli), [Alex Hayes](/author/alex-hayes), and [John Sakaluk](/author/john-sakaluk). 

{{< figure src = "speakers.png" class = "center" width = "600" alt = "Headshots of the moderator and four panelists">}}

> We decided to write this additional blog post to provide a ready reference and description of this community call, which introduced the system being developed for peer review of explicitly statistical software, along with a couple of the automated software tools for use by developers and reviewers of statistical software.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This post provides a ready reference and description of this community call, which introduced the system being developed for peer review of explicitly statistical software, along with a couple of the automated software tools for use by developers and reviewers of statistical software.
```

> After an introduction by Stefanie Butland, Anna Krystali gave an overview of the context and importance of our new tools from an editorial perspective.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

After an introduction by Stefanie Butland, Anna Krystali gave an overview of the context and importance of our new tools from an editorial perspective.
```

Noam Ross then introduced the statistical software review project, members of its advisory board, and the standards-based system which will be used to assess and review statistical software.
Mark Padgham then briefly described the two main tools intended for use by developers and reviewers: the [`autotest` package](https://ropenscilabs.github.io/autotest/) for automated testing of software to ensure robust responses to unexpected inputs throughout development, and the [`srr` (**s**oftware **r**eview **r**oclets) package](https://ropenscilabs.github.io/srr/) for documenting within code itself how and where it complies with both general and category-specific standards for statistical software.

> The call then moved on to its main intention of being a "hands-on" demonstration of how these packages can be used in practice, by first passing to [John Sakaluk](https://www.psychology.uwo.ca/people/faculty/profiles/sakaluk.html), who has developed the [`dySEM` package](https://jsakaluk.github.io/dySEM/) for his own use, and would now like to refine and extend the package for more general use, ideally working towards submission to our peer-review system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The call then moved on to a "hands-on" demonstration of how these packages can be used in practice.  [John Sakaluk](https://www.psychology.uwo.ca/people/faculty/profiles/sakaluk.html) showed `autotests`'s capabilites on his [`dySEM` package](https://jsakaluk.github.io/dySEM/). John developed `dySEM` for his own use, and would now like to refine and extend the package for more general use, ideally working towards submission to our peer-review system.
```

John described the usefulness of [`autotest`](https://ropenscilabs.github.io/autotest/) in explicitly revealing aspects of his code which could be improved for more general usage.

> (cool quotes from John once captions are up ...)

> [Alex Hayes](https://www.alexpghayes.com/) then described his experiences from initial review of his [`fastadi` package](https://github.com/RoheLab/fastadi), and of the role standards can play in software improvement and assessment, noting in particular the usefulness of standards as contextual "touchpoints" for review.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Alex Hayes](https://www.alexpghayes.com/) then described his experiences from initial review of his [`fastadi` package](https://github.com/RoheLab/fastadi), and of the role standards can play in software improvement and assessment, noting in particular the usefulness of standards as contextual "touchpoints" for review, and how the [`srr` package](https://ropenscilabs.github.io/srr/) tracks these standards through the development process
```

> Here we've organized the video content by speakers and questions, including links to the specific time points in the [video](https://vimeo.com/518761488) as well as to questions and answers in the [collaborative document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/) that we include in every community call. 

Reviewer: I recommend putting this paragraph after heading `Summarizing ...`. When I first browsed the post, I went straight to that heading and thought the above para was "missing"

> Here we've organized the video content by speakers and questions, including links to the specific time points in the [video](https://vimeo.com/518761488) as well as to questions and answers in the [collaborative document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/) that we include in every community call. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here we've organized the video content by speakers and questions, including links to the specific time points in the [video](https://vimeo.com/518761488) as well as to questions and answers in the [collaborative notes document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/). 
```

We hope that by preparing this summary, more people will be able to benefit from this information.

## Summarizing the community call

> ### Speakers

Reviewer: omit caps in all "titles" here I think e.g. The editorial perspective

- **Anna Krystalli - The Editorial Perspective** ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=4m00s))

- **Noam Ross - Project Introduction** ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=7m01s))

- **Mark Padgham - Introducing autotest and srr packages** ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=12m31s))

- **John Sakaluk - Using autotest on a package-in-development** ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=23m34s))

- **Alex Hayes - Using srr while preparing a package for review** ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=31m23s))

- **Anna Kyrstalli - Moderates Questions** ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=38m47s))

### Questions

> - (Anna) Suggestion of RStudio addin for srr ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=38m47s))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Anna Krystalli) Suggestion of RStudio addin for srr ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=38m47s))
```

> - (Anna) Could we get more detail on what autotest looks for? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=39m45s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.so3v8xc34myn))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Anna Krystalli) Could we get more detail on what autotest looks for? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=39m45s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.so3v8xc34myn))
```

> - (Steffi) Is autotest applicable to all packages or just statistical packages? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=43m11s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.4th2qtdafspr))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Steffi LaZerte) Is autotest applicable to all packages or just statistical packages? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=43m11s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.4th2qtdafspr))
```

> - (Kieran) What is missing from these package for assessing statistical packages? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=44m43s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.jk4fef3ixoga))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Kieran Martin) What is missing from these package for assessing statistical packages? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=44m43s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.jk4fef3ixoga))
```

> - (Joss) We are just beginning to re-code some existing packages - so have the advantage of starting with a blank sheet AND a good specification AND well tested code snippets. We're new to this community - what advice would give on both engagement and coding? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=49m07s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.fvjzqwqcf88u))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Joss Langford) We are just beginning to re-code some existing packages - so have the advantage of starting with a blank sheet AND a good specification AND well tested code snippets. We're new to this community - what advice would give on both engagement and coding? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=49m07s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.fvjzqwqcf88u))
```

> - (John) Regarding representation in the program, do we have any sense where groups of folks are over/under-represented within specific areas? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=53m27s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.xnstfjt1cjg7))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (John Sakaluk) Regarding representation in the program, do we have any sense where groups of folks are over/under-represented within specific areas? ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=53m27s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.xnstfjt1cjg7))
```

> - (Rafael) What is the vision for applying these srr standards to existing (previously published) rOpenSci packages ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=55m40s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.78ydzxagwubi))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Rafael Pilliard Hellwig) What is the vision for applying these srr standards to existing (previously published) rOpenSci packages ([video](https://vimeo.com/518761488#t=55m40s) | [document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.78ydzxagwubi))
```

> - (Charles) Does autotest take into account dependencies and dependency changes? ([document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.s52f459a2yp1))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- (Charles Sweetland) Does autotest take into account dependencies and dependency changes? ([document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o933nG1ZW2Qf8p7FdQxn8wOkk9qoBINL1fx3FlIFSJU/edit#heading=h.s52f459a2yp1))
```
